Translator: Ereblir Kadriu Reviewer: Artan Shabani
Thank you very much.
I came to America 12 years ago
with my wife Terry and our two children.
In fact, we came to Los Angeles -
thinking we were coming to America.
Either way, it’s a short flight of
Los Angeles in America.
I arrived 12 years ago,
and when I arrived, I was told some things,
as if, "Americans don't understand irony."
Have you heard of this idea before?
It's not true. I have traveled the entire length and breadth of this state.
I have found no evidence that Americans do not understand irony.
It is one of the cultural myths,
as if, "The British are reserved people."
I don't know why people think that way.
We have conquered every state we have encountered.
(Laughter)
It is not true that Americans do not understand irony,
but I want you to know that this is what others do
say about you, behind your back.
So when you leave the living rooms in Europe,
people say, fortunately no one was ironic in your presence.
I realized that Americans understand irony
when I came across the legislation No Child Left Behind.
Because anyone who thinks about this title understands the irony,
or not, because -
(Laughter) (Applause) -
because I'm leaving millions of children behind.
I can say that this is not a very attractive name for a legislation.
Millions of Children Remain Behind. I can understand this title.
What is the plan? We propose
to leave millions of children behind,
and here’s how it will work.
And it is working wonders.
In some parts of the state,
60% of children drop out of high school.
In the communities of Native Americans
80% of children drop out of school.
If we halve this number, a calculation
indicates it would generate profits for the US economy,
so over the next 10 years they will earn $ 10 trillion.
From an economic point of view,
that's a good calculation, isn't it, and we have to do it?
In fact, it costs a lot to cover
the damage of the school dropout crisis.
But dropping out of school is just the beginning of the iceberg.
This does not take into account students who are in school,
but they are not ungrateful, they do not enjoy school,
and have no benefit from schooling.
The reason for this is not
that we are not spending enough money.
America spends more money on education
than most other states.
The size of the classes is much smaller than in many other countries.
There are hundreds of initiatives every year that
try to improve education.
The problem is that all of this is going in the wrong direction.
Human life develops over
three principles
and these principles are opposed by the culture of education
which most teachers follow,
and most students afford it.
The first principle is that human beings
are naturally different and varied.
Can I ask how many of you
do you have children
Good. Granddaughter or granddaughter?
Who has two or more children?
And the rest of you have probably seen such children.
(Laughter)
Little people around.
I will place a bet,
and I have confidence that I will win.
If you have two or more children,
bet they are very different from each other.
Or not? Or not? (Applause)
You're not going to confuse them, are you?
You will not ask. "Who are you? Remember me.
Your mother and I will start using
colors, so we won't confuse you anymore. "
Education According to No Child Left Behind
it is not based on variety, but on adaptation.
Schools are encouraged to find things that
children can do along a narrow spectrum of achievement.
One of the effects of No Child Left Behind
has been to narrow the focus
to STEM disciplines. These are very important.
I am not here to oppose science and mathematics.
On the contrary, they are necessary, but not enough.
True education must be given equal importance
arts, humanities, physical education.
Many children ... thank you (Applause) ...
A current calculation in America shows that
10% of children who follow this program,
have been diagnosed with various conditions
that are part of concentration disorders.
ADHD. I am not saying that this disorder does not exist.
But I do not believe it is such an epidemic.
If you put the kids down, hour after hour,
and push them to do clerical work,
don't be surprised if they start to get upset.
(Laughter and applause)
Most of these children do not suffer from
any psychological condition.
They suffer from childhood.
I know this because I spent the early years
of life as a child. I went through all this.
Children progress when they have a lesson plan
celebrating various talents,
and not just an extension of them.
I mean the arts are not important
just because they improve points in math.
They are important because they talk to them
parts of children that would remain intact.
Second..Thank you.
The second principle that drives the progress of
human life, is curiosity.
If you can turn on the light of curiosity in a child,
they often learn without any other help.
Children are natural students.
It is a real achievement to stop this
skill, or drown it.
Curiosity is the engine of achievement.
I say this because one of the effects of the current culture
if I may say so.
is the de-professionalization of teachers.
There is no school in the world that is
or in any state
which is better than its teachers.
Teachers are the life and success of the school.
But teaching is a creative profession.
Teaching, if understood properly, is not a delivery system.
So, you are not there just to convey the information received.
Good teachers do it,
but what good teachers do is counseling,
simulation, provocation, interaction.
So, in the end, education is about learning.
If you don't learn,
then there is no education.
People can spend a lot of time
discussing education without discussing teaching.
The whole purpose of education is to make people learn.
A friend of mine, an old friend-- actually very old
he cdekur. (Laughter)
It is very old.
But he was a wonderful man, a wonderful philosopher.
He talked about the difference between tasks
and achievement.
Thus, you can engage in any activity,
but not by reaching it,
as if dieting. It is a very good example.
Here it is. He is on a diet. Is he losing weight? Not so.
Teaching is a word like this.
You might say, "Here's Deborah, she's in room 34, she's a teacher."
But if no one learns anything,
then she can engage in the teaching task
but in fact not fulfilling it.
The role of the teacher is to facilitate teaching. This is all.
And part of the problem is, I think,
that the dominant culture of education is not in focus
teaching and learning, but testing.
Now, testing is important. Standardization tests are important.
But they cannot be the dominant culture of education.
They must be diagnostic. They need help.
(Applause)
If I want to take a medical exam,
I would like standardized tests.
So, I want to know what my cholesterol level is
compared to others in the standard scale.
"Your cholesterol is what we call Orange Level."
Really? Is it okay? "" We don't know. "
But all of this must support learning. I should not hinder him
which usually happens.
So as for curiosity, what do we have
it is the culture of reconciliation.
Our children and teachers are encouraged
to follow the routine algorithm
instead of testing the power of imagination and curiosity
And the third principle is this:
that human life is naturally creative.
That is why we all have different beginnings.
We create our lives,
and we can recreate it as we pass through it
It is the common currency of being human.
This is why human culture is so interesting and diverse
and dynamic.
I mean, other animals may have imagination
and creativity, but there isn’t even that much evidence,
yes no, not how much for us?
You may have had one.
And your dog may be depressed.
So, but he doesn't listen to Radiohead, does he?
(Laughter)
And he stares out the window at a bottle of Jack Daniels.
And say, "Want to walk?"
He says, "No, I'm fine.
You go, I will wait. But I take pictures. "
We all create our lives through this tireless process
imagining alternatives and opportunities,
and one of the roles of education
is to awaken and develop these competencies of creativity.
Instead, what we have is a culture of standardization.
Then, it shouldn't be that way. It really shouldn't be.
Finland usually comes out first
in mathematics, science and reading.
We know this is what they do best
because that’s all that’s currently being tested.
This is one of the problems of the test.
The issue with Finland's work is this:
they are not affected by these disciplines.
They have a broad approach to education
which includes humanization, physical education, the arts.
Second, there are no standardization tests in Finland.
I mean, there's a little,
but that doesn't wake people up in the morning.
That's not why he keeps them on their desks.
And the third thing, and I was in a meeting last time
with some people from Finland, really Finnish people,
and someone from the American system
was telling people in Finland,
"What do you do about the abandonment cycle in Finland?"
And they all looked a little surprised, and said,
"Look, we don't have one.
Why would you leave?
If people are in trouble, we deal with them very quickly
and we help them and support them. "
Now people always say, “Okay, look,
you can't compare Finland with America. "
No. I think in Finland
has a population of about 5 million.
But you can compare it to the state of America.
Many states in America have fewer people in them than that.
I mean, I've been to a few countries in America
and I was the only person there. (Laughter)
Really. Really. I was told to make sure I left.
(Laughter)
But what do performance systems in the world do?
it is now what is not evident, unfortunately
through systems in America-- I mean, as a whole.
One is this: They distinguish between teaching and learning.
They claim that it is the students who are learning
and the system must engage them, their curiosity,
their individuality, and their creativity.
This is how it stimulates them to learn
The second is that they attribute a high status to it
teaching profession.
They acknowledge that education cannot be improved
if you do not employ excellent people
and if you do not provide constant support
and professional development.
Investing in professional development is not an expense
It's an investment,
and every country that is having good success knows this,
if it is Australia, Canada, South Korea, Singapore,
Hong Kong or Shanghai.
And the third is, they transfer responsibility
at the school level to do the job as well as possible.
Thus, there is a big difference between
way of command and control in education--
This is what happens in some systems.
Thus, central governments decide
or state governments decide
they know things better and they will tell you what to do.
The problem is that education does not work
in the commission rooms of legal buildings.
It takes place in classrooms and schools,
and the people who do it are teachers and students,
and if you remove their discretion, the work stops.
You have to put it back on people.
(Duartroktije)
A great job is being done in this country.
But I have to say that this is happening
despite the dominant culture of education,
not because of that.
It seems like people are floating in the opposite direction all the time.
And the reason I think is this:
that most current policies are based on
mechanical conceptions of education.
It seems like education is an industrial process
which can only be improved by having better data,
I think, that in the mind
of some policy makers is this idea that
It will not be done, and it has never been done.
The point is that education is not a mechanical system.
It is a human system. It has to do with people,
who are willing or unwilling to learn.
Every student who leaves school has a reason
which is rooted in their biography.
You may find them boring. It may seem out of place to them.
This may seem contradictory to them
with the life they are living outside of school.
There are trends, but the stories remain unique each time.
Finally, I was in a meeting in Los Angeles -
they are called alternative education programs.
These are programs designed to get children back to school.
They have certain features in common.
They are very personalized.
They have total support from teachers,
close ties with the community
and a wide and varied curriculum,
and very often programs in which students are involved
outside the school as well as inside it.
And they work.
What is interesting to me is that,
these are called "alternative education."
You know?
And all the evidence from all over the world is,
if we all did that, there would be no need for an alternative.
(Duartroktije)
So I think we have to choose a different metaphor.
We have to accept that this is a human system,
and there are conditions under which people thrive,
and conditions against which they will not flourish.
After all, we are organic creatures,
and school culture is absolutely essential.
Culture is an organic term, isn't it?
Not far from where I live is a place called Death Valley.
Death Valley is the hottest, driest place in America,
and nothing grows there.
Nothing grows there because it doesn’t rain.
Therefore, Death Valley.
In the winter of 2004, it rained in the Death Valley.
Seven inches of rain fell during a very short period.
And in the spring of 2005, it was a phenomenon.
The entire floor of the Death Valley was covered with flowers
for some time.
What is proven is that: Death Valley is not dead.
Is sleeping.
Right in the middle of the surface are these seeds of opportunity
waiting for the right conditions to erupt,
and with organic systems, if the conditions are in order,
life is inevitable. It happens every time.
You get an area, a school, a province,
change the conditions, give people another sense of opportunity.
another group of vulnerabilities,
a wider range of possibilities,
you nurture and value the relationship between teachers and students,
you offer people the choice to be creative
and what they do,
and schools that were once deprived of life.
Great leaders know it.
The real role of leadership in education--
should not be controlled and commanded by
national, state level
and school level--
The main role of leadership is environmental control,
creating an environmental opportunity.
And if you do that, people will rise up for it
and last things they did not anticipate
and that they did not expect them.
It's a wonderful saying from Benjamin Franklin.
"There are three types of people in the world:
Those who are immutable
people who don't understand, those who don't want to understand,
those who do everything to achieve.
There are people who are different,
people who see the need for change
and are prepared to listen to it.
And there are people who move,
people who put things in perspective. "
And if we can encourage more people,
this will be a move.
And if the movement is strong enough,
which means, in the good sense of the word, revolution.
And that's what we need.
Thank you very much.
applause
Thank you very much. (Applause)